thank you very much it's my pleasure to
welcome you to session 200 which is a
graphics an imaging overview hopefully
what we typically do at the sort of
overview session for the graphics track
at WWC is we followed a formula in the
past and that formula is essentially
tell you about the new announcements for
the upcoming technology announcements
for the upcoming version of Mac OS 10
and then point you to various sessions
they're going to talk about those those
particular technologies and we're
actually going to change things up a
little bit this year and what we're
going to do is sort of recast the
session and we're going to actually
recast as a graphics and imaging
direction session because it's a very
important thing that's happening at
Apple that our rate of innovation in
terms of the graphics technologies that
we build into Mac OS 10 is incredible
we have fantastic technologies such as
quartz extreme a compositing windowing
system that gives us the ability to
create dramatic visual effects such as
expose and also the fast user switching
that everyone seemed to like yesterday
the cube that rotated around as we
switch between user accounts and
additionally we have you know incredible
2d performance is shown by the sort of
PDF bake-off that happened at
yesterday's keynote and we continue to
really work with these technologies and
continue to innovate and it's
interesting and my role as an evangelist
here at Apple I work with many of you to
help you understand our graphics
technology portfolio and leverage it in
your products what's come sort of to our
attention is the fact that we're really
pushing the envelope in graphics and
with your release cycles being anywhere
from 12 to 24 months it's often
difficult for you guys to see where the
trend is to see which technologies you
guys need to really invest in in terms
of building your products on to make
sure you make maximal use of the
platform and create really compelling
applications for our mutual users so
what we're going to do at this session
is we're gonna focus on two main themes
that we have that run through our sort
of you know technology innovation and
graphics at Apple that's going to be PDF
and also the ascendancy of the GPU as a
way to do a lot of even 2d graphics work
so what I'd like to do is invite Peter
Griffin Eno the director of graphics and
imaging software to the stage and he's
going to take you through the session
thank you
thanks Travis great thank you very much
Travis
good to be here at WWDC good to see all
you guys here I think we've got a great
week for you today this week at WWDC and
today in particular we're going to take
you through the overview of the graphics
and imaging sessions which are always
fun sessions at WWDC the first thing I'm
going to do is for those of you who are
new or new to Mac OS 10 or new to WWDC
is do a brief overview of the graphics
architecture of Mac OS 10 then I'm going
to go into as Travis said two kind of
central themes underlying themes that
that we see in the industry and that
we're taking advantage of in Mac OS 10
but I think it's really important for
you guys to understand the first one is
about PDF which we call Mac OS tens
digital paper the next is a GPU
computing revolution which i think is a
real significant development and finally
we'll go and do the tour of technologies
and show you what's new and Panther so
first of all the block diagram review to
all of you we've got our core OS Darwin
at the bottom
based on FreeBSD in mock graphics layers
on top of that and then the frameworks
cocoa carbon and on top of that the user
interface aqua the graphics areas we've
got all of our technologies quartz 2d
for 2d graphics OpenGL for 3d graphics
QuickTime for multimedia and video and
our compositing windowing system called
quartz compositor QuickTime you heard
about if you were in the session before
it was general overview of quicktime
directions they've combined the
QuickTime live conference with wabg see
this year so there's a lot of great
content on QuickTime but I'm not really
going to talk about it right here quartz
2d I'll give you a brief overview of
what's what's in quartz 2d basically
it's our 2d imaging model based on the
industry standard PostScript in PDF
model this imaging models been around
for a number of years almost 20 years
now and it's really kind of a credit to
the original designers that it's able to
describe basically ever
Paige that's ever been printed in fact
Adobe celebrating the 20th anniversary
of PostScript and they published a nice
book that was kind of interesting read
if you're into the history of this stuff
but anyway our courts 2d imaging model
is based on the industry standard
PostScript and it's really just a
lightweight C library that implements
the PostScript imaging model primitives
and so there's no display PDF as some
people have have asked about or display
PostScript or anything like that it's
really just a lightweight C library we
can read and write PDF with that library
so you can think of PDF as kind of the
meta file format for the graphics
library in fact we knew we wanted PDF to
be the meta file format so we kind of
worked backward from that to figure out
what the good API would be for that
we've got really fast anti-aliasing as
you see in the aqua user interface the
quality of the presentation of the line
art and graphics and icons is really
important so we spent a lot of time
making things look good and run real
fast as destination alpha which allows
us to record coverage information as we
draw this allows us to do composited
icons and sprites that can carry along
their anti-aliasing information as they
animate or move around one of the great
things about PostScript it really
revolutionized digital typography
invented you know outline fonts
device-independent fonts and over the
years there's of course been type one
the original Adobe Digital font format
there's been TrueType that Apple
invented and OpenType and others have
come along and Apple has a great
technology called Apple type services
that quartz 2d leverages to do bringing
all the all the typefaces and just
handle them seamlessly for you including
a full type one scalar color sync is
also built in the quartz 2d it's our
implementation of the ICC standard for
colored managed workflow and allows us
to manage color end-to-end in the quartz
2d library and obviously one of the big
things about a 2d library is how it
relates to printing basically the whole
WYSIWYG notion of being able to have the
same imaging model for screen in
printing and so quartz and PDF played
very much a central role in the printing
our
texture as well the spool file we create
when you go to draw into your printing
context is just a PDF file and then that
PDF file is rasterized for inkjet
printers using the same high-quality
quartz rasterization or converted to
postscript for PostScript printer and
again we can use the end and color
management we have in the system to
manage color through the whole process
and the infrastructure we build all the
graphics conversion around that's part
of printing and just important is sort
of the spooling and sequencing
architecture and the networking
architecture around printing and for
that we're using an open-source
technology called cups which stands for
common UNIX printing system which is an
implementation of an open standard
called IPP and it's kind of an upgrade
if you're familiar with the LPR LPD
suite that comes along with Unix this is
kind of an upgrade to that there are
commits still command-line utilities
that do the same LP LP LPR functions but
cup's provides a much more modern
infrastructure for that so that's kind
of quartz 2d to kind of give you a brief
framework in which to think about our 2d
graphics for 3d graphics it's OpenGL
again industry standard technology been
around for maybe 15 years as the
original iris graphics library on the
silicon graphics machines and apples
implementation is really a state of the
art implementation we took our job very
seriously in terms of building an OS
infrastructure around driving graphics
cards and virtualizing resources like
video memory usage and we have a lot of
data flow optimation is to make sure
things like multimedia and video can
flow through the system very quickly the
other advantage we have is we have a
unified driver model so unlike on the PC
where you may get a monolithic OpenGL
stack from a vendor we have a lot of the
stack under apple control so we can
expose extensions like rectangle texture
or vertex program in a standard way
across all of the vendors hardware which
makes a lot easier for you as a
programmer
we also focus a lot on stability and
robustness because as you know we use a
lot of OpenGL throughout the operating
system so it's really
not just for games although it's a great
game technology and we still focus a lot
on games we're really driving it
throughout other places in the OS as
well so some of the innovative uses of
OpenGL in the operating system we have
of course quartz extreme which we talked
about last year which puts the entire
compositing of the windowing system on
top of OpenGL there's also a bunch of
innovative uses that are starting to
emerge in consumer applications for
example keynote the slide slide shows
you're seeing here are all in OpenGL and
when keynote goes full screen it's using
OpenGL to render all the all the slides
and the transitions I chat the
conferencing screen view and I chat is
actually done with OpenGL so all the
picture-in-picture you see the animation
of the and blending of the of the two
scenes of the you know near and far
scene are all done with OpenGL so we're
really kind of pushing it as as a
technology to to use in innovative ways
and consumer applications and hopefully
you guys based on you know some of the
stuff you'll learn about this week at
WWC you will want to use GL and your
apps and new creative ways as well so
that's OpenGL last kind of review bullet
here is about the quartz compositor the
quartz compositor is our implementation
of the windowing system basically
composites all the layers together on
the screen it's based again on some
pretty tried and true techniques in the
industry a seminal paper 1984 SIGGRAPH
about the compositing algebra by Porter
and Duff they basically introduced the
notion of the alpha Channel RGB a
compositing and a whole algebra for
doing that and in those days they were
doing things like they had one program
that could render fractals in one
program that could say render spheres
and you didn't want to run them both
every frame if one was static and so you
needed a way to combine the results
after the rendering with high quality
anti-aliasing and that's where the
compositing algebra came into play and
it's been used you know pretty much ever
since as a real fundamental primitive of
graphics and what we're doing is just
using that in real time on the display
to composite the output of all the
applications to make up the graphical
user interface so here's the block
diagram of quartz extreme which we
announced last
dear which is the implementation of the
quartz compositor on top of OpenGL so
the application can be drawing in
whatever graphics library it wants
whether it's quartz 2d OpenGL QuickTime
and basically the compositor will blend
those together using GL into the frame
buffer now Panther is kind of our third
generation of this sort of desktop
compositing engine we originally in the
first release of Mac OS 10 it was all
software based solution with some
hardware acceleration for like moving
opaque windows and things like that and
Jaguar we put everything on top of GL
and Panther we've been refining it
further to make it suitable for things
like the expose feature that you saw and
it's really the natural evolution of
windowing systems I think really think
people and users just expect Windows to
composite and I think everyone's gonna
be doing this eventually and Apple
OpenGL since we've proven in Jaguar and
been running the desktop compositor on
top of GL ever since Jaguar I think it's
obvious that Apple Apple GL is is robust
enough for 24 by 7 operation and the
other thing that's key to understand
about the quartz extreme implementation
is once it once it gets the textured
polygons it needs to draw to make up the
GUI there's really no special OpenGL
calls it makes all of the acceleration
in terms of minimal CPU copies and
getting data to the frame buffer and the
blending modes and all those things are
accessible to OpenGL developers so we
did a lot of tuning on the data paths to
make sure we did minimal copies because
when you're throwing around you know
megabytes per window you really can't
copy any data but all of those
advantages advances are usable by you
and in fact the keynote guys take
advantage a lot of those because they
have pretty big textures when they're
compositing and doing transitions as
well so the big thing that we did new
with quartz extreme this year one of the
main things was the expose I'm not going
to give you a demo because you saw in
the keynote but basically the idea of
animating all your windows so you can
see everything have a nice ability to
pick up a icon off the desktop and
without having to drop it
release the windows and be able to drag
it into something
that's basically the corpse compositor
so there you have all the graphics
technologies Mac OS 10 you know it's
sort of a brief a brief review let me go
into now one of my first kind of
extended themes that I'm going to talk
about today and that's PDF what I call
Mac OS 10 s digital paper and this is
not really a general kind of PDF in the
industry discussion but kind of how we
view PDF as an OS implementer and
provider and what we're using it for in
terms of the OS and the kind of
opportunities we're trying to make
available for you guys as developers so
first off this digital paper notion PDF
the best way I can always think of to
describe to someone what PDF is is just
to say digital paper because it really
is a digital representation of a printed
page so in other words it's got
pagination built in and it can basically
represent the output from any
application so it's application
independent it can present output to any
number of devices it can handle any
color spaces or whatever so it's device
independent and it's extremely high
fidelity I mean basically the imaging
model behind PDF is the same as the
imaging mile behind PostScript and as I
said before it's been able to describe
basically every page ever printed in the
last 20 years or so so that's pretty
pretty high fidelity and there's 500
million viewers distributed so it's
obviously universal you can send someone
a PDF file and be pretty guaranteed that
no matter what platform on they'll be
able to look at it so the what the way I
think about it is PDF is really a
universal sort of view level abstraction
in the MVC paradigm world and when I put
these slides together I didn't know MVC
was going to be such the theme at WWC
this year but so I have a brief review
of MVC from a graphics guys standpoint
so MVC is a standard way object-oriented
programmers have have thought about
factoring code into a model of view and
a controller and my example is basically
the model is the application data
structures like the
variables and the algorithms and the
data of behind the model of the program
the view is a visual representation so
it could be a pie chart or a bar graph
whatever you whatever you want the idea
is you could have multiple views of the
same model data and the controller might
be a user interface area where you let
you know the user type into into a field
to change the data to manipulate the
model and so basically the value of MVC
is the fact that you've factored your
code so you have model that can have
multiple views so if you have a pie
chart or a bar graph you know if you
change your implementation of how to
recalculate the spreadsheet models could
have multiple controllers so you could
have a simple user interface an advanced
user interface or even a scripting
interface and have your model code be
the same and it kind of from a graphic
standpoint the interesting thing is that
any model whether it's Reggie database
audio file or whatever can project
themselves into a 2d representation to
show to the user otherwise the user
wouldn't be able to run the app because
they couldn't they couldn't you know see
the data and so views of vastly
different models can share a common
visual language and this is how a
graphical user interfaces work when you
think about it I mean you basically have
similar looking windows but presenting
vastly different models of depending
upon which applications being run and
the same thing with documents compound
documents may where you may have part of
a document coming from a spreadsheet
part of a document coming out of a
database part of a document from a text
flow and because you can project all
those things down to a view level format
which is say a PDF file you can have
them all share the common visual
language even though the actual data
backing them is pretty pretty different
so let's move on here
I might have to use the old-fashioned
way here okay so document based
applications are really MVC in in their
nature you can think of the model as
kind of the application file the data
structures in the application in this
case excel the excel file is really you
can think of as the model the view would
be like the document window that comes
up where you get the row and column
representation of the model and the
controller would be the user interface
of the application all the menus and
panels that you interact with I'll try
this one more time there we go so the
interesting thing to realize from a
graphic standpoint is when you create a
PDF from your spreadsheet it's no longer
a spreadsheet
you've projected that model into a view
and you really just have a
representation of a spreadsheet and I
think it's really important to keep the
difference between models and views and
look at it this way and how PDF serves
so a model versus view if you can
imagine if I'm interacting with someone
I have a choice of whether to send them
the excel file or send them the PDF that
represents the the data in the excel
file and really both are valid choices
on the left hand with the model I get a
very high fidelity model representation
I can exchange data and they can modify
modify the model if they want or change
the formulas it requires that they're
going to have that application and also
have any fonts or plugins that I may
have used in creating that model on the
other hand on the on the view exchange
side if I send them a PDF I can
guarantee that they're gonna be able to
see it because there's 500 million
viewers out there they're gonna see the
right fonts they're gonna see everything
they're not gonna be able to interact
with the data or change the basic
calculations that go on in fact in many
cases you don't want that but they are
going to get a high fidelity of view
representation
so one of the reasons why this is I
think important to layout is that if you
look at the typical File menu of a
application sometimes we get asked why
save as PDF isn't just in there and I
think the reason has to do with this
model versus view idea normally in the
file menu when you're talking about open
closed save or even export you're
talking about export exporting or saving
the actual model data the application
which could be you know anything but
when you talk about saving as PDF what
you're really talking about is
essentially going through the print
process the mapping of the model data to
imaginated representation but just not
sending it to any device just keeping
that as it as a digital file around and
so saving the PDF I really conceptually
think of as just printing the digital
paper and that's really the the notion I
think that that carries us the farthest
in terms of how to think about this and
so what really hasn't been said before
but I think is a really important point
is that Mac os10 is the first commercial
OS to have a system-wide standard for
digital paper that's Universal and PDF
truly is universal in terms of being
able to view it so PDF is not a great
model level construct and you know there
are some some cases where maybe it's
possible to encode sort of flowable text
in PDF and this can be interesting and
sort of closed-loop situations but
basically the thing to remember here is
that your are starting to impose model
level constructs on what it's
essentially a view level idea and if you
think about a text flow model actually
they're quite complicated and a precise
specification would include your styling
model your obstacle avoidance model how
your containers connect and flow a
pagination model whether you're allowed
with a window widows and orphans and
those kind of things justification model
and a hyphenation model which is then
going to require a whole language
dictionary so you know how to break up
words so a complete specification of a
of a actual text flow is it's fairly
complicated and I think kind of beyond
the scope of what PDF and it's certainly
not a universally agreed to notion of
how to how to flow text so and the main
reason I think that's true is it kind of
sacrifices the universe
fala D I mean the amazing thing about
PDF is that everyone agrees that it's a
universally agreed to abstraction for
marks on a page I don't think everyone
necessarily agrees that there is one
universal abstraction for global text
documents or spreadsheets or even that
there should be one so our basic idea is
that models are precisely where
applications innovate and differentiate
and we want apps to innovate and
differentiate but just always be able to
print down to a PDF because then we can
take that through the PDF workflow so
again our strategy is basically to use
PDF as digital paper use it as a final
form format of paginate addd also vector
artwork use other formats such as XML to
encode model data that's kind of our
advice I mean that's what we do with
keynote and other applications and
really build a rich framework for
processing this digital paper in the
operating system and encourage
applications to differentiate themselves
by developing innovative models so long
live MVC separations so that's my little
talk on MVC and let's see how that once
we get all the applications projecting
their PDF their models into PDF how that
really benefits the graphic arts
workflow so here I've drawn a sample
graphic arts workflow you can think of
it starting with application dependent
files removing the application
dependence to get to some kind of
digital marks on a page representation
and then finally going device dependent
and either rasterizing to a set of tips
for CMYK separations basically going
from device independence to device
dependence and application dependence to
application independence so one of the
traditional ways this is done and this
is really kind of the key that made PDF
possible is that all applications
whether it's word illustrator quark
whatever can make PostScript and what
adobe realizes that if they can make
postcodes we can sort of rebind the
PostScript language to this format
called PDF that's easier to read and
have have a reader application for and
so this is kind of a workflow that that
was popular when PDF initially came out
basically everything projected in the
PostScript that need run a process a
distiller process and create your PDF
and you could maybe tune it for the web
and downsample the image or between it
for print optimization or pre-press now
that's great but there's really a better
way to do things I think I talked about
creating you know a purpose PDF for the
web or for print but isn't PDF itself
device independent you know it's suppose
I create my web optimized PDF and later
I realize I'd rather have it print
optimized well then I do I keep that
PostScript file around so that I can go
back to it and and and repurpose it
where do I keep the application file
around then I need the application so do
we really want PDS to be sorry PS to be
the the application independent digital
master and I think it's pretty clear the
answer is no if you think about taking
this picture and just replacing the hub
with PDF that's really the architecture
that we've been going for in Mac OS 10
and the nice thing about putting PDF in
the middle there is it's really a better
suited kind of digital master format
than PostScript again it's viewable on
all these copies of Acrobat out there
and it really can losslessly encode the
application intent since it's exactly
the same imaging model as PostScript
that digital master PDF that sits in the
middle doesn't have to pass judgment on
the application what the applications
trying to draw the applications trying
to draw high definition images or high
resolution images or weird color spaces
or true type fonts or type two or
OpenType fonts I don't really have to
care because I would just want to record
what the applications telling me to draw
and then later on I can purpose it out
if I need to and so the nice thing about
adding PDF as that center of the hub of
just recording what the application drew
is not only can I now later you know
make a late binding decision whether I
want to go web or print but I can also
develop all these device independent PDF
processing tools instead of this opaque
PostScript file in the middle that I
need a language interpreter and you know
I can't even tell you how many pages are
in it till I execute the document I now
have a much better device independent
representation there and I can write
little tools that do cover page or in
position or whatever
top of it so that's really why I think
it's key to have PDF in the center of
that and PDF processing on Mac os10 is a
pretty popular thing there's over 50
little PDF applications some not so
little on Mac os10 some from big names
some from small names and Panther is
gonna bring new opportunities and this
is kind of one of the thrust with
Panther four on the 2d side is really
getting to leverage the possibilities
with PDF so we add a bunch of new PDF
workflow tools in Panther addressing
PostScript file handling user level
scripting we have something called
quartz PDF filters printing to a PDF
workflow and PDF introspection api's and
let me go through each of those briefly
both scripted PDF conversion basically
allows us to deal with the PostScript
legacy files not necessarily put
PostScript in the middle but provide a
graphically lossless transformation from
PostScript to PDF it works with EPS
files as well it's based on a real
PostScript interpreter and it's not a
replacement for distiller it doesn't do
a lot of the finishing up options you
haven't distiller but it basically
allows us to graphically transform
PostScript to PDF the other nice thing
on the printing side is it allows us to
accept PostScript jobs to any printer
from say a Windows client or a Mac OS 9
client so again back to the picture now
with PostScript can feed that hub so we
can take PostScript files
convert them to PDF and then have them
in that hub and subject to all the
transformations that all the great PDF
tools you guys are going to write can
can do another aspect of the PostScript
legacy that was kind of lost along the
way was the ability to have some level
of user level programmability
PostScript was actually a programming
language and some people used it to
dynamically generate graphics so the pro
script program would calculate the
picture rather than just being the
output from a driver PDF can't really do
this but the reverse polish notation of
PostScript and its abilities as the
language also kind of made this a bear
and this this you know always turned out
to be more difficult than you'd like it
to be
but nonetheless some people found this
incredibly useful the ability to have
simple scripting based bound with the 2d
graphics and although I never used
PostScript as a pickup line I found this
on the web which was pretty amazing
so what we've done actually is take the
courts 2d API and use a real scripting
language Python and to create Python
bindings for the courts 2d API it's
basically the C live C language API
entry points that you can see in the
courts header files but just bound into
into a Python interpreter within with a
module and this allows simple PDF
processing from scripts we've added some
convenience functions for dealing with
QuickTime for getting images in and out
for dealing with cocoa in terms of
drawing HTML RTF and unicode and also
for dealing with our postscript to PDF
converters so you can read post Krypton
and EPS files so basically I think this
is going to allow a new generation of
script writers to really write simple
tools to be able to manipulate PDF and
it's really handy for small one-off
processing scripts and one of the
reasons we did this ourselves as we had
a bunch of places in the printing path
where we just need to make a simple
change to the document and rather than
write code it's just easier to do it
this way so you can imagine some
examples like rasterizing an eps file to
a bitmap and exporting it via quicktime
doing some advanced emphasis in position
algorithms for booklet printing or
something like that just concatenate two
PDF files together it's pretty few lines
of code adding a cover page or
watermarks to a PDF is pretty easy
dynamically generating graphics on a
server is something I think that's going
to be very interesting in terms of being
able to have all this power in a server
based application unlike PostScript you
can't really override the marking
operators you can't read the find show
and show page but for now we consider
that to be a feature because it's a
little bit unmaintainable
so as an example I actually did this
went off and looked at the old
PostScript blue book I don't know if any
of you guys remember that book but
there's a simple example in there called
wedge and it draws this little starburst
here and that's the PostScript code on
the right and the Python code on the
Python codes a little bit longer but
probably more readable certainly these
days so the next thing I'm going to
mention briefly is quartz PDF filters
quartz PDF filters allow us to do some
transformations on PDF mostly dealing
with color space transformations and you
create these recipes and the color sync
utility that the color sync session
they're gonna they're going to demo this
and talk about it and it can be used for
color conversion effects or even just we
use it in the printing path when we're
going to a black and white burner over a
slow link we want to get rid of all the
color and just bring it down to the
black and white before we send it over
the wire
it does have some imagery sampling and
compression options built-in as well
print to PDF workflow this is something
we announced back in one of the Jaguar
updates it allows you to extend the
Print panel again leveraging print as
though as the kind of hub of where PDF
workflow takes off and basically that
save as PDF button in the print panel
can grow to any number of options that
that the user wants in terms of
applications that can open and deal with
PDF for example you could send the PDF
off to illustrator and work on it or
send it to mail to bring it up in a
compose window or encrypted or whatever
so this is a great place to hook in if
you're writing up a little PDF
processing tool and some of you guys
have already done this a great way to
leverage into the system and lastly our
PDF introspection API is which our new
API is in Panther which allow you to
have complete access to the PDF document
structure as kind of the tree of objects
it basically models the dictionaries
streams strings arrays that are in the
PDF file itself it doesn't go and model
the internal of the graphics streams but
it but it is useful for extracting
things like links annotations and
metadata and stuff like that so enough
talking for now let's bring Ralph up to
the stage and give you a demo of some of
the stuff we have as far as PDF
processing in preview and Panther look
around
hello so what I'm going to show you
first is preview in Panter which makes
use of these nuclear PDF introspection
ap is that Peter was mentioning so I'm
opening a PDF document here it's one of
my favorite documents and it has a table
of content information embedded in the
file and in Panter if that's the case
then the drawer to the right pops open
and shows you the table of contents you
can navigate through chapters and see
for example all the instructions that
the velocity engine has and click on one
of them
well there's back floor but similarly we
also added search for PDF so I can
actually look for string not not equal
and it shows me all the pages where that
expression occurs again I can click on
that page and jump to the corresponding
page hey well one thing that Peter was
mentioning is the PostScript to PDF
conversion and what I'm going to do is
essentially just double click a
postscript document from finder and the
Posca to PDF conversion kicks in and it
will open in preview briefly yes yes so
what you see here
this is a paper I got from the internet
it's impo script it just got converted
Texas their line out is there all the
mathematical formulas are there so
pretty much what you would expect and
because it's now PDF all those tools we
have to work with PDFs and I work on the
converted PostScript file as well so for
example I can go and search for the word
image let me zoom in here and it's
actually highlighted for you and one of
the coolest things I think is you can
even go and copy/paste out of the
document like I select paragraph here
happy and I get a text representation of
the part I chose copy Act okay next
thing I would like to show you is course
scripting what I have here is a Python
script that well let's just go through
it it opens a PDF file an existing PDF
file and it creates a new PDF file and
then it enumerates all the pages in the
PDF file gets the size of the pay of the
particular page creates a new page in
the output file and just draws the
content of the original page into the
output file so so far we didn't really
do anything exciting it's pretty much a
copy operation and then we add some
custom drawing in this case we add red
text to the margin of the page once
we're done with it we tell the system to
open that file with the default previa
PDF view of the system so what I'm going
to do now is Wow let me tell me first if
you put that script into the PDF
services folder then it will appear in
the print panel as Peter was showing so
if I go to the print panel where is it
here
and it takes a second so so I'm gonna
print this script and I'm gonna print it
through the script so it's kind of a
naturist thing to do so let's see and
there it is so I have to print out a
little script and it added that
confidential mark on the side oops so
just to make that point perfectly clear
this works with everything so I can take
my PostScript file that just had before
print it through your script and get
confidential mark on any page well as
the paper was published is probably not
confidential but okay that's it for the
PDF demo great thanks Ralph
so for all those of you who have your
theses locked away and dot PS files that
you can't read anymore
you can search him that I know a few
people like that
okay so courts in PDF summary PDF really
provides Mac os10
with the universal representation at
digital paper and we plan to leverage
that a lot more in the operating system
and hopefully build lots of
opportunities for you guys as well to
process PDF and our strategy is really
to continue to build on it has a view
level of abstraction final form
presentation metaphor for PDF and I hope
we've convinced you that in Panther
we're adding a lot of really significant
tools to the PDF toolset and as my last
comment I'd say if you're still you know
thinking pics Maps and G worlds come
join the courts to D party go to the
sessions learn about it it's pretty fun
stuff so that's it for the for the PDF
and courts 2d session you know change
gears a little bit now and talk about
kind of another development in the
industry and this one's you know much
much bigger than Apple it's kind of
going on right now and I'm going to call
that the my slides work here the GPU
computing revolution there's really
something going on now in terms of the
ability of graphics processors to to
compute graphics at much higher rates
then even CPUs can I might have to walk
over here so let's first let's look at
some numbers so when we did quartz
extreme obviously we knew that GPS could
composite faster than than CPUs and if
you look at a typical high end GPU today
you're getting eight results eight
pixels per clock at about 400 500
megahertz and twenty and some of the new
ones even 30 megabytes gigabytes per
second of memory bandwidth even a really
nice CPU like the new 970 s is one pixel
per clock at two gigahertz with 6.4
gigabytes per second of memory bandwidth
and so by utilizing the GPU not only is
it faster but you can free up the CPU to
do lots of other stuff in your
applications as well and what I'm trying
to do in this talk now is kind of
convinced you that this this trend is
sustainable and that you really should
take a look at if you have calculations
in the area of graphics that you can
move to the GPU with some of the
programmable options that you should you
should be looking at that so here's a
little historical data of GPUs versus
CPUs in terms of performance the CPU
number is 160 percent a year that's just
the standard Moore's law doubling every
18 months on it on a yearly basis works
out 260 percent that's the orange curve
the GPU curve is what historical data
for GPUs has been over the last few
years about two hundred twenty percent
per year in terms of computational
bandwidth increase so as you can see if
you know your if your software is
rotting the the red curve and your
competitors software is riding the
orange curve you've got a pretty good
ride ahead of you and in fact over time
that gap is going to get bigger and
bigger and the reason this is possible
is the capability growth in just the
silicon technology is even increasing at
even higher rate if you look at how many
switches you can throw per second on a
chip some numbers indicate that that's
even growing at 270 percent per year in
terms of transistors per unit area and
clock speeds there's a lot of headroom
here but what a GPU designers know that
CPU designers don't and the answer
really is nothing there's a cpus a
general-purpose computer and a GPU is
really not a general-purpose processor
the computation that goes on on a GPU is
what some call embarrassingly parallel
which i think is pretty funny term and
really entertainment applications like
games have provided a sustainable
economic model where people could invest
in built building this VLSI to do
massively parallel computations for
graphics and I think that's going to
sustain for a while and one of the ways
to look at this is what I call
computational intensity which is how
much math do you do per gate on your
chip and one way to approach this is to
look at GPU design versus CPU design if
you go to a GPU designer and you say
okay your next generation chip I'm going
to give you double the number of
transistors he's probably gonna come
back with a design that goes twice as
fast in fact if he doesn't he's probably
not not not gonna be working for you for
very long
a CPU designer you give him double the
gate budget I think it's pretty hard for
him to come up with double the
performance and usually it's much less
and the reason for that is general
purpose CPU since it's a decision-making
engine has to provide a lot of non
computational logic about instruction
and data caches you know some chips are
up to you know thirty to forty or fifty
percent cache branch prediction logic
very complicated instruction reordering
data hazard avoidance in the load and
store units a lot of logic has to go
into keeping the math units fed and the
difference is with with GPUs they
operate on a different computing model
that's called stream processing and
that's where you have data records
flowing through a small compute engine
coming in getting operated on by a small
kernel of code and being spit out as
data records on to the next element in
the chain so you can have a GPU imagine
the GPU as as thousands of these little
stream processors and each one gets its
input from its the previous guy does its
calculation and passes the input on to
the next so you have very high-speed
dedicated producer-consumer links with
no data hazards or anything between
these pieces of the chip you can get
huge wide bandwidth and the stream
processor stays busy all the time if his
job is to add two pixels he can just sit
there and do it clock after clock after
clock and CPU guys only wish they had
that luxury to know that there was
always work to do a lot of CPU logic is
just finding work to do
most of the stream execution units
within a GPU are hardwired to the
particular graphics problem but there is
some program ability in some key places
that's emerging and that's what I think
is really the important trend for you
guys to understand let's look at the
graphics pipeline a little bit the
traditional graphics pipeline starts
with primitive submission on the top
where you basically convert primitives
into a vertex stream vertex can be
thought of as a bundle of position
vector normal vector color vector that's
actually up to 16 arbitrary 4 vectors
that you associate with each vertex then
the vertices the process
so the spatial vectors are transformed
by the appropriate matrix lighting might
be calculated texture coordinates are
transformed basically performing
operations on each of these bundles of
data with each vertex then you go
through what's called triangle
rasterization where the vertices are put
into a triangle and basically
interpolated through the interior of the
triangle we take the attribute bundle at
each vertex and calculate what's called
a fragment which is basically those the
intermediate values with sort of the
weighted average of how far they are
from each vertex then the fragments are
processed so we apply texture mapping we
calculate what the final color and Z for
that particular pixel is going to be and
then the last step is fragment rendering
where we do the Z check against the
frame buffer we do alpha blending
compositing fog those kinds of things
and so that's the whole graphics
pipeline and this is sort of the way
it's been been for a while and what's
happening is the the GPU vendors are
opening up these two parts of the
graphics processor as being programmable
so you can think of that little stream
stream execution unit kind of getting
plugged into the vertex processing in
fragment processing areas so when you
hear those those terms that's really
what's going on you're having a little a
small little dataflow engine that can do
a small calculation per vertex or per
fragment when I talk about fragments I
also sometimes talk about pixels so I
think sometimes it's easier for people
who are new to 3d to think about pixels
and that that's okay with me so I'm
gonna talk about pixel pixel programming
so pixel programming is used a data
model similar to altivec the
programmable units operate on 128-bit
four vectors of floats obviously your
texture lookups may come from 8-bit data
but it's all expanded for you into the
floating point and you basically get to
write a small cap small program that's
executed per pixel to calculate the
result of the output pixel so you know
okay control over the blending and the
z-test and all that sort of stuff but
you can get total control over the the
source color of the pixel you get access
to the iterated values so those little
the vertex attributes at the
the corners of the triangle you get
access to what that value is for the
particular fix that you're drawing you
can look in some global data you can
look at do memory reads off of textures
you can't look at the destination pixel
you can't know what you're gonna draw to
you just leave your output in a special
result register and there's a lot of
powerful ALU instructions like power or
reciprocal square root cross-product all
these kind of things and a bunch of
squizzle instructions for changing order
on the on the data units and the vectors
so this is pseudocode this is not in any
particular language just to try to
communicate the simplicity and the job
of a pixel program or a fragment program
basically they all have the same
function signature calculate pixel
returns a result gets the iterated
values and it can do whatever
computation it wants it has access to
some global constants as read-only and a
global set of textures that it can go
look up values in and that's really all
it does now I'm gonna explain to you why
I think that that once you constrain the
problem like that you can make it go
real fast and why GPU designers kind of
have this advantage with the parallelism
so this isn't how any particular chip
works but just how if you can train the
calculation like that how you might be
able to design hardware to make it go
fast
so first let's consider just a for
instruction long fragment program and I
have one vector unit right now so I'm
going to just do sequential processing
through it I'm gonna send my fragment
values into the vector unit and then
basically clock the instructions through
one after the next and after four clocks
have gone by I get my result because I
have a for instruction long program so
I'm basically doing one operation per
clock I'm able to keep the processor
busy every every cycle and I get one
result every four clocks so no big news
there that's just sequential processing
now there's a lot of data level
parallelism in this problem pixel
calculations because of the way of
fragment programs are constructed are
independent so the result pixel at a
particular location can't depend on the
result of pixel at another location
the pixel calculations can basically
execute in parallel so call this
parallelism in space because it's kind
of in the in the plane of the triangle
what I can do here is just replicate the
fragment execution unit in width and
just do the same instruction on multiple
multiple vectors that at one time so
here's how I might have might have that
laid out on now I have eight vector
units I can feed in simultaneously eight
fragment values into the pipeline and
then basically sequence through my
instructions one at a time and at the
end get my eight results out so that
gives us eight vector operations per
clock were able to keep all eight of
those busy every clock we get eight
results every four clocks because it's
four instructions long so on average
throughput of two two pixels per clock
but wait there's more instruction level
parallelism is also true because it
again we're constrained we can't really
write to any memory the Machine states
only going to differ between one
instructions and the next by the
register that was written to in the
previous instruction so you can imagine
compilation techniques or even maybe
some hardware register renaming
techniques coming into place to just
build a little pipeline out of the out
of M Bleen
out of a sequence of instructions so
let's look how that might work now we're
going to line up the vector units in
time and basically I'm going to teach
each vector unit about an instruction so
vector unit one gets instruction one
vector unit two gets instruction two and
so on and now I'm going to feed my
fragment value in the top operate on it
with instruction one and the first
vector unit move it on the instruction
unit two meanwhile I feed the next
fragment value into vector unit one and
kind of keep the pipeline full and once
the pipeline is full I'm really just
processing again keeping all the units
busy at the same time and so now I'm
fully utilizing all my four units for
operations per clock I'm getting one
result every clock once the operation is
full so obviously the next thing no
surprising and put both of these things
together and basically exploit the time
and the space dimension
at the same time so I just you know get
a bigger chip you know drag out more
vector units and make a sort of a 3232
element fabric where I've got them four
by eight just for illustration purposes
and now basically I can feed you know
teach each row about a single
instruction feed the fragments in fill
up the pipeline and then basically get
eight results per pip per clock with
doing 32 operations per clock so eight
results per clock so I think you can see
that as time goes on and maybe today is
number 32 tomorrow those numbers 64 I
mean you're not gonna run out of gas in
the in the time dimension until you you
know the average size of a triangle you
begin to approach which for image image
processing things where you're rendering
big triangles there's lots of parallel
fragments and in space you know this is
only a four instruction program you can
obviously imagine much longer
instruction so there's a lot of headroom
just in terms of parallelism so
basically my argument is that will
sustain and I think the chip
capabilities certainly hasn't peaked
I think the parallel computing
possibilities haven't even come close to
peaking yet we've got sort of eight by
four as I drew here and I think there's
still lots of headroom for that and I
think the entertainment industry's going
strong and it's not is not peaked and as
operating systems and applications get
into the game I think we're just gonna
add fuel to this fire and really have an
interesting world where people are doing
massively parallel computations on the
GPU to free up their CPU to do other
stuff as well so you might ask yourself
that sounds great how do I do it and the
answer is you use OpenGL in Panther we
have standard cross vendor programming
languages at both the vertex level and
the fragment level those begin with the
ARB prefix which is the architecture
review board for OpenGL so you don't
have to learn vendor specific extensions
there are a higher-level language being
worked on and those will come out as
well but assembly level language will
will always be available and I think
these architectures are so new you know
we found like you get rid of one
temporary and the thing runs twice as
fast so people are probably gonna be
tweaking assembly on
things for a while programs are
relatively small so maybe that's not a
big deal but the higher-level languages
are coming as well so without further
ado let's bring Ralph back up and show
you some fragment programs we've got a
Radeon 9700 plugged into this machine
over here which is running the ARP
fragment program go ahead roll ok so the
first thing I'm going to show you is the
OpenGL shader builder application that
is in Panther and well you see it here
on the left side you have your little
fragment program and on the right side
they have a very complex OpenGL scene
which consists of a single rectangle so
that rectangle has a texture on it and
there is actually a fragment program
running right now that does that
texturing so if you look on the left
side what this fragment program does it
goes to the textures in texture 0 uses
the current texture coordinate to looked
at look up the color at that point and
then copies that color to the results so
you get a texture
quote well this isn't terribly exciting
because non-programmable Hardware does
exactly that for you so there's no point
to actually write this program but we
can go and modify it a bit so for
example instead of copying the color
back to the destination pixel unmodified
I can say well only copy the green and
the Alpha Channel and well the red and
blue channels are lost so you see the
result here it is this rather unhealthy
looking cat okay so let's add an
instruction in the middle here after we
did the texture lookup we take the red
component of the color and square it and
then copy that the green and blue to
produce some kind of a sepia-tone effect
but it doesn't look right so let's tweak
the exponent a bit let's say we take
that one to the fifth yeah
- don't feel like this until you have to
look you're going for now what you
noticed is whenever I type in the
background the program is compiled and
run and shown to you right away so you
get immediate feedback what your program
does which is very nice to experiment
and to get into things okay that's it
for shader builder now that I've shown
you what you can do with three
instructions let me show you what you
can do if you put a bit more effort into
things okay so by the way this picture
has been called demo monkey and so have
I so the first thing I'm going to show
you is a motion blur effect implemented
as a fragment program the interface is
essentially I click somewhere and drag
the mouse in some direction and I get a
motion blur in that direction
so the first thing is notice it's pretty
smooth frame rate and really the GL
operations that that GL commands are
going on here is there are four vertices
live in four corners of that big
rectangle and then it says draw so how
you run your fragment program is you
don't rectangle essentially and then for
every pixel the fragment program gets
executed to do that effect so another
effect we tried is an axial blur like
this you can set the focus point to
wherever you want it to be like this
so because what the CPU does here is
really negligible I mean it just you
know here are four vertices go and from
then on it just waits until the result
is done so this is pretty much this is a
very very nice effect that is fairly
expensive to compute but it has pretty
much a zero CPU cost
let me show you a different one a glass
distortion effect so you can make the
bombs bigger and smaller and actually
move the glass around like this okay
oops the last effect I would like to
show is like an emboss effect so what
this does is it takes the picture we had
before and interprets the brightness
values as hills and valleys in you know
like some kind of really F thing and
then put a spotlight on it so you can
actually go and drag the spotlight
around
make the beam biter narrower things like
that and again you have to you have to
do that by a while to realize this you
doesn't use any CPU at all it's really
just you know the only thing that CPU
does series update the sliders okay I
think that's it for the fragment program
thanks Ralph so in summary for this
section of the the GPU talk Irene I hope
I've convinced you that GP is for
certain classes of data parallel
workloads and algorithms really have an
advantage over CPUs and I think that
this advantage is going to be
sustainable for at least the foreseeable
future and you can use this to access to
this power via OpenGL and my advice to
you is learn how to do this stuff before
your competitors do because there's some
pretty cool things are going to be
happening so the last section I'm going
to talk about today is another effort
we've been working on which is quartz 2d
on OpenGL quartz 2d on OpenGL basically
accelerates quartz 2d by turning it into
GL calls and it's really the logical
next step after quartz extreme it ties
together the two kind of key throws we
talked about today of programming the
graphics processor and PDF 2d in
plantasia and in Panther we're going to
have an initial implementation of this
that really focuses mostly for GL
developers who want to get high-quality
text and line art into their
applications which has always been a
really difficult thing to do with GL so
the way that you do this is you take
your GL context and you pass it to a
function called CG GL context create you
give the size of the CG context you want
in the color space you want to render
into and you just make CG calls on that
CG context graph it's high-quality 2d
rendering it's virtually identical to
software quality we do use the alpha
blending in the hardware so it's not
pixel you know the values aren't could
be exactly the same but it basically
looks indistinguishable from the
software and it's anywhere from three to
ten times faster than then course 2d
software rendering the the way it gets
to be on the order of ten times faster
is when we can actually catch things in
the in the graphics unit so we will
cache text fonts glyphs as textures and
if you hold onto your cg image refs or
CG pattern refs and reuse them the
implementation will catch those in video
memory as
well so you can draw very quickly with
that the well the reason we're kind of
calling it an initial implementation
right now is because there are certain
courts 2d operations that are not yet
supported by this context for one thing
we can't do the high quality LCD text
that we have in the system without
relying on fragment programming and
since fragment program is kind of at the
high end right now and it's coming down
through the through the system we can't
really kind of turn on quartz 2d
acceleration everywhere right now the
other thing is the PDF 1.4 blend modes
which are also going to require fragment
programming we also you have to be using
the core graphics API only or the courts
2d API only you can't turn around and
draw some quick draw with thing you
can't ask for the locking deport bits
and you can't use high-level frameworks
on this context so you pretty much have
to be going right at it with the courts
to dapi
we do require coarse extreme capable
Hardware so we have the non power of two
texturing which is important for drawing
images and things like that and
generally as as as this path becomes
available I think applications are going
to have to revisit some of their
assumptions about the cheapness of
accessing the drawing buffer the window
buffer so it's another thing to be aware
of in your usage model if you want to
use this kind of acceleration so the
basic way I tell this story is that
having a wide pipe is really great but
it also increases the cost of turn of
reading reading back pixels and turning
everything around so if you imagine
you're on a little stream towards the
frame buffer and you drop a few pixels
in and you realize you want them back
yeah maybe you can just reach down the
stream and grab them but if you drop
them over the top of Niagara Falls yeah
we got to stop the Falls let all the
water fall down climb down there and get
the pixels bring them back up you're not
gonna be running any faster than
software in fact in some cases slower so
to use courts 2d on OpenGL you have to
you know buy into the whole asynchronous
and the pixels you know they'll show up
when they show up I never want to look
back at pixels as I've drawn except very
rarely otherwise it's just not going to
be any faster for you so I'll invite
Ralph up one last time for a demo of
courts 2d on OpenGL
okay first application that goes I'm
going to show you is a chat as we've
seen in the keynote I chopped has now
this video conferencing feature the way
that videoconferencing view is
implemented is actually fairly
interesting it is an Open GL scene so
there is a video is put on a texture and
this is said displayed oops I think I'll
be your camera my camera man that's a
good point
okay so video is put on a texture and
then GL composites that texture and the
reason why that is done is in if you
have a two-way conference going you have
this little picture in picture which has
a drop shadow and sometimes there is
content being shown as translucent alert
messages lying on top of life video and
stuff so GL is really good at these kind
of things and it also does the
conversion from a video value V to RGB
so that takes all that load off the CPU
so the CPU is free to do the actual
video encoding and the networking stuff
that is necessary so this is a slightly
modified version of I chat to make this
demo what I'm doing here is I'm drawing
text on top of it and this is text drawn
into an OpenGL scene and it's not text
on a texture it is essentially CG show
text at point and then point it at that
texture so you just draw into it and you
get you know all the font management the
kerning and all these kind of things
that are usually very hard to get in
OpenGL so a second example I have here I
have a PDF document this one here has a
little frame and a bit of line art in
the corner by the way the way I made
this PDF document I wrote a little
quartz scripting script the Python
script that takes the places to line out
and draws Noble so I'm going to take
that and drag it into my view
so we put a little oscillator on it to
change size but the point here is again
this is not drawn into a texture every
single frame we reinterpret that PDF and
draw it on top so the scaling you get
here is not scaling of a bitmap its
vector or scaling okay so let me show
you something about the performance of
these things what I'm running here is a
PDF document it's the app gate reference
manual which is a thousand three hundred
pages long and I'm just trying to flip
through the pages as fast as I can and
this is the standard quartz software
renderer that you get in Panter and you
see that little frame rate meter in the
top right corner
yeah we're getting you know it's kind of
low fifty to sixty frames per second so
that's actually when you think about it
pretty impressive it's you know sixty
pages per second that definitely beats
the laser writer okay but now I will
replace the content view here with an
OpenGL view and then point the same PDF
file at the Open GL quartz OpenGL
renderer and it gets a bit better so we
are around 160 to 180 pages per second
now and literally the piece of code that
needed to be done there is something
like three lines of setup so the rest
that the actual rendering code is
exactly the same so why is it fast
well it's what Peter said about that
asynchronous model so but PDF parsing
involves well you have to departing and
you have to do decompression of the
stream and then you draw so what happens
in this case once you did the
decompression of a graphics primitive
you just submit it to the GPU and while
the GPU is doing the graphics you'll be
you're ready to decompress the next part
and do the additional parsing so you
have now the CPU and the GPU
in parallel very nicely so that's by the
way that the little CPU meter you see
there this is a two CPU machine so it
runs at 50 percent so me one CPU is
fully busy well you might wonder now
well if I take all that parsing and
decompression stuff out of the loop
because when I my application draws it
doesn't do that it just calls the CG API
so and then I will say well I'm glad you
asked because that's what we did it we
essentially took out all the graphics
primitives off that PDF file and wrote a
little big list and then just call the
CG API is to do the same drawing so it's
technically no longer a PDF the drawing
of a PDF it's drawing of the PDF content
and when I do that things start to look
like this see that the CPU is still busy
we're actually still the CPU is still
either completely saturated with sending
these commands over the GPU so I would
consider that an unique opportunity but
we'll see ok that's it for the
yeah that's pretty amazing I think
wealth was telling the story about when
we were bringing this demo together and
they can't to go back what twice to make
the frame counter go higher yeah 100
that should be enough no 200 that should
be enough 400 okay so anyway so the
recap of kind of the talk today is
basically that there's really a new era
of innovation in platform graphics
that's happening in the industry and I
think Mac os10 is kind of leading the
charge here and it's really kind of a
state of the art visual computing
platform for all your applications so in
your apps
please leverage all the great
infrastructure we were building in of
course 2d and OpenGL and I think unlike
sort of in the old days there was a
period where people had to work around
operating system infrastructure to try
to do what they wanted to because of
limitations in quick draw or GDI or
whatever platform graphics was there
well I think we're kind of coming upon a
new era where the platform graphics is
getting good enough that you build on
top of it and really can go places you
don't have to go back and reinvent all
of your blit loops again let us do that
work and you guys add great value on top
of that and with all these new things
going on in the industry particularly
with OpenGL and fragment program it's
really fun to go just learn a few new
tricks and and crack open the GL book or
something like that and and teach
yourself some new techniques because
there's a lot of new stuff happening so
for the last few minutes at the talk
what I'm going to do is briefly whiz you
through some of the pointers to other
sessions that you want to check out if
hopefully we've piqued your interest
during the talk today I'll start with
quartz 2d some of the new things in
Panther for quartz today's PDF 1.4
support the PDF introspection API we
talked about the quartz scripting with
the Python bindings CMYK rendering
context so now we can drive raster
printers in their native color space
numerous performance optimizations and
of course as you saw quartz 2d on OpenGL
there's a course 2d in depth session on
Thursday and then an intro to court
services which talks about some of the
display management infrastructure on
Friday for Panther obviously were
shipping 1.0 of our excel
an implementation as we talked about
yesterday this will be emerged with a
4.3 X 486 it's on your on your seed we
have double clickable x11 applications
now in full-screen mode operation and a
lot of bug fixes so check this out in
the sheet if you're an X Developer it's
it's all in the disk you have also new
for Panther and printing we've got
PostScript support we're really excited
about that the ability to basically have
any Mac os10 attached printer be seen on
the network as a postscript printer user
interface improvements we've got an
improved version of the old desktop
printers which is coming out in Panther
we have job submission API is if you
know how to calculate your own PDF file
or your own PostScript file you can just
hand that to the school system directly
and not have to watch that page counting
dialogue go by we're merging with cups
one point one point one nine the latest
version of cups and we're also going to
be shipping the GIMP drivers this time
around the GIMP print drivers which are
great for legacy printers it supports a
whole bunch of printers and the drivers
are really first-class citizens with
their user interface and integration so
the printing session is on Thursday so
you want to check that out for color
sync some of the new things if you went
to the QuickTime Talk you saw Tim talk a
little bit about color sync and its
relation to QuickTime graphics importer
who apply profiles by default cameras
are gonna embed profiles by default with
taking the with a standard standard
profile cups and GIMP print drivers can
be integrated with color sinks and vent
profiles and have matching occur we've
got the cup court's PDF filters that I
talked about you'll want to go see those
and sips which is a command line image
processing tool which is meant to
interface with Apple script so apple
scripters can do basic image operations
like crop and rotate without having to
launch preview or whatever new api is
for abstract profile generation color
sync has the facility to do actual
manipulations in abstract color spaces
like the sepia tone in la b and there's
going to be new api's to how to express
those kinds of color transformations in
in Panther and also a new display
calibrator that's tuned for LCDs so go
hear about that on Wednesday for image
capture
a bunch of new stuff there were new ways
to integrate your applications with
image capture there's automatic task
image capture services which is a cocoa
and carbon service menu is now you can
integrate that with image capture
there's also a common UI layer for if
you want to do scanning from within an
application you can call on that there's
also a network support for sharing and
monitoring image capture devices over
the web so that's that's kind of cool as
well
on Wednesday session 204 is image
capture and OpenGL excuse me
need my water OpenGL new for panther
there's fragment program pixel buffer
support lots of optimizations about copy
text image and copy text sub image we
have recoverable GPU support from
drivers that support it the ability to
reset the GPU on the fly without
bringing the Machine down which is
pretty handy it's about security bugging
drivers OpenGL shader builder and
profiler these are two really great
tools we have for OpenGL developers and
I think you want to go to the sessions
and see those because those are really
making great strides in Panther again
the ability to use quartz 2d in an
OpenGL context and just lots of bug
fixes and optimization techniques you
can hear about so this is a bunch of
sessions that we have for OpenGL I'll
point out in particular the last one
session 212 on Friday we're actually
going to have some of the demo engineers
from ATI come and show you how they
built their demo engine and run through
a couple of techniques they used in
their demos last year we had Nvidia do
this it was a great session and it's
going to be great again this year and
another special session later on today
we thought it would be really fun to
have the keynote engineers come and talk
about keynote as an application and how
they really leverage the platform
services in terms of quartz 2d OpenGL
QuickTime cocoa to build what I think is
really a great application that really
kind of swims downstream with all the
technology and builds on top of what
we're doing in the operating system so
that'll be a really interesting session
to attend as well so and last but not
least our feedback forum which
is at five o'clock the last thing in the
conference in the North Beach conference
room so come to there tell us what we're
doing right what we're doing wrong what
you'd like to see us do in the future
and will we always love enjoy talking
you guys are getting your feedback
you